# The Telegraph 
## Introduction
Long distance communication has always been deep in the interest of human civilisation. Weather that was through smoke signals by the Native Americans, drums by African tribes, Running as used by the ancient Greeks, or sending domesticated pigeons like the Romans did, humans have always shown interest in being able to quickly send messages over a long distance within a short period of time. 
The invention of the telegraph system allowed us to send messages over a very long distance within a few seconds. It was also the first device to send messages via electricity. The telegraph is therefore an incredibly important invention in human history, and marks the beginning of long-distance communication through electricity.
## History 
In 1791 the Chappe brothers Claude and Ignace Chappe invented the Chappe telegraph. It was a semaphore, which means it ran through visual symbols that could be seen from afar. The telegraph was purely mechanical and ran through a system of pulleys and gears to change the alignment of 3 iron bars above the tower. The different combination of these iron bars would represent different letters or symbols, and so messages could be sent as far as the horizon allows it. This is of course very simplified and there was a lot more to it, but for the sake of this "electrical" project, it isn't really relevant. Although the functions of the Chappe telegraph and its history are very interesting and worth learning aswell, it isn't important for the context of the electrical telegraph. 

The invention of the electric telegraph was allowed due to the increasing amount of scientific discoveries that were being made at the time - especially in the field of electricity and electromagnetism. In 1800 Alessandro Volta of Italy invented the Voltaic cell (Redox Reactions that generate current) which marked the beginning of small batteries. Up to that point, electricity was only known as stored electric outburst like in animals or when rubbing amber with a cloth, for example. Volta's invention created a steady current and supply of electricity, which was perfect for devices that needed a steady power supply - which is most devices. 

What followed was many more inventions in the field of electricity, electric circuits, magnetism and electromagnetism. Some of these include electromagnetic induction: If you rub a wire with a magnet it will create an electric current. Electromagnetism: Electric current creates a magnetic field, so if you wrap some wire around an iron nail and turn it on, the contraption will turn into a magnet that can be turned on or off. 
Between 1832 and 1837 many different types of telegraphs were created. Below are some famous examples:
- 1832 - Pavel Schilling, a Russian diplomat, built an electromagnetic telegraph using a wire for each letter.
- 1833 - Carl F. Gauss and Wilhelm Weber of Germany invented an electric telegraph with a needle that points to a letter
- 1835 - Joseph Henry, an American inventor, invented a relay station to boost electric current.
- 1836 - Edward Davy invented a better relay switch in the UK
- 1837 - Cooke and Wheatstone of the UK invented a better telegraph with 5 needles pointing to a letter
- 1837 - Samuel Morse invents the sound based encoding system "Morse Code" and uses it in his own telegraph. 
- 
All of these shared the same idea: send a text message over a long distance in a short time using electricity or magnetism. The big problem everyone was facing though, was how to convey electric signals into actual letters and numbers. So inventions called for as many different wires as symbols your alphabet contains, a board with 5 points that point to the letter you want to send, depending on the strength of the signal, a pointer that points to your letter on a clock-like board, and many more. 1837 Samuel Morse independantly invented the telegraph and used a system that no one else has thought of yet: sound! His invention used an electromagnet that would pull a piece of metal to produce a click or a ding sound, and different combinations of these clicks would refer to different letters, numbers or symbols. His invention only needed a single wire, and also didn't rely on different electric strengths. It was as simple as that. A simple buttin press, and all that mattered, was how long you kept the button pressed. To be able to send messages over long distances, he used the previously invented relay switches to keep the voltage at a usable rate. By the 1840s, due to its simplicity, the Morse telegraph became the most widespread. 

## How it works
In this project, to learn more about how the telegraph works, we will be looking at the most wide-spread and famous type of telegraph - The Morse telegraph. That's the one with the sounds and the morse code, also sometimes shown as printed dots and dashes where dots are short pauses between clicks and dashes are long pauses. We will later look at this system. This is the same telegraph often depicted in movies or comics - such as the Lucky Luke comic series.

The Morse telegraph is quite simple - It is basically a circuit with a button and once the button gets pressed the circuit closes and a sounder is activated making a clicking noise. The longer the button is closed the longer the pause between the clicks sound lasts. It's as simple as that! Below is a circuit schematic showing the sending and receiving stations respectively. This is the first step of the morse telegraph - but we aren't quite there yet. In this schematic, City A has the "telegraph key", which is the button, and City B has the "telegraph sounder", which is the sounder indicating a message. We have to imagine that the cable connecting City A and City B isn't just a couple of meters, but many kilometers even. The first commercial telegraph was sent from Washington D.C. to Baltimore which is a distance of almost 70km or just above 40 miles. Now you probably have realised something - it isn't a closed circuit. And you are right! There is only one cable connecting the two, so where is the return cable? Well, our planet is the return cable. Basically, if both sides just tie their respective grounds to a metre long conducting rod (like a steel rod) and shove it in the ground outside their stations, the earth will act as the return cable. Though it is important to note that that only worked in moist regions with soil. In dry and sandy or rocky places they would have to build specific saltwater pits to allow conductivity. Like that we are saving a lot of money and material on a return cable. Another thing you might have noticed is, that messages can only be sent from City A to City B. To allow messages to be sent in both directions, each station has its own telegraph key and sounder. When City A presses its key, City B hears a click, and vice versa. The same wire is used for both directions, and each station has its own battery to power outgoing signals. They don't even need a switch since the key is a button which is generally off anyway, so the current is forced through the sounding part. 


